Blender -> UE 3/4 FBX Tools

Blender addon that adds an editor for custom vertex normals, and an exporter with some tweaks and optimizations specific to the Unreal engine.

The exporter can also calculate tangents and binormals on export, allowing you to take advantage of the xNormal - UDK synced workflow using Blender.



*Compatible with Blender v2.70 and up*

=============================================================================

*Installation:*

	- Copy the 'udk_fbx_tools' folder to your addons directory.
	- Find it in the Addon Manager in the 'Mesh' category as 'UE FBX Normals Tools' and enable it.
	- There should now be a new tab titled 'FBX Tools' in your tools panel.


==================================================================================

*Notes:*

- Normals can be applied to the mesh in Vertex Mode, but not in Poly Mode. Both modes support displaying normals as 3D lines.
-- The mesh's displayed normals will reset every time you enter Blender's Edit Mode, and can be reset by clicking _Apply to Mesh_ again.

- For meshes to export correctly, you need to apply any changes you made to the mesh's rotation, location or scale before exporting.

*Export Time* 
Exporting Tangents can be pretty slow. I've sped the script up a little since the initial release, but it can stil take some time on complex meshes.
Blender may hitch or freeze while exporting, but shouldn't crash :)
I'm looking into more performance tweaks for this, but I wouldn't expect any miracles... The current implementation loops through a potentially massive list in Python.

*Editing Performance* 
I've tested this on meshes with between 6 and 35000 polys. On my mid-range system (Intel i5-2500 with 8GB of RAM and a Geforce 560ti),
real-time display of normals and my custom angle-based generation algorithm are very slow on anything past 8000 or so polys, depending on the mesh's
density. Checking "Selected Only" in the display section of each tool helps, but will slow things down more as you approach higher counts. I have a 
pretty good idea of why it's doing this and will try to optimize things some more soon.

*Angle-Based (Custom) Generation mode*
This isn't really a feature, more of an experiment to see if I can build a normal generation algorithm in python.
It's really slow, unfinished, and has weird results at the moment, so you probably shouldn't use it...

*The smoothing groups editor had some problems and has been disabled for now.*

*Tangents and Unreal Engine 4:*
The tangents generated by this addon looked OK in UE4 in my initial tests, but after some experiments with Mikk Tspace (which UE4 uses natively) it turns out that there is a slight difference in shading
compared to automatically generated tangents. For this reason, it looks like letting UE4 generate tangents is a better option than calculating them with addon.

==================================================================================

*Features:*

_Editor for Vertex Normals:_

	- Manual editing per poly or vertex normals
	- Automatic generation with several presets for different scenarios
		-- presets: (More advanced presets for foliage/tree normals should be up soon)
			--- Smooth (Blender default)
			--- Up-Vector
			--- Bent (facing away from 3d cursor by an adjustable ratio)
			--- Ground Foliage (selected ground based vertices point up, everything else bent from an offset point)
			--- Custom (similar to Blender's default normals with the ability to generate normals for selected faces as if they are disconnected)
	- Allows calculating normals for selected faces or the whole mesh
	- Normals can be displayed as lines for visual editing
	- copy/paste selected normals between meshes with identical vert locations (buggy/wip, but fixes modular mesh seams when it works)
	- Real-time in Edit Mode


_Customized FBX Exporter:_

	- Can calculate and export tangents and binormals
	- Can export custom normals from the included editor
	- Support to export normals generated by asdn's Recalc Vertex Normals addon
	- Unreal Engine 3/4-specific optimizations:
		-- root bone fix that removes the armature bone and sets the root bone to whatever you want
		----- root bone is now parented to the scene to stop weirdness with some software and UE physics
		----- this fix also allows mesh orientations to be exported without having to mess around with the axis settings
		-- tangents are very close to UDK
	- Exported meshes should now be fully compatible with nvidia's Apex Tools, xNormal and most other software that uses the FBX format
		- (previous versions caused crashes on import for some software)
	- Exports animations for both UDK and UE4 properly now
	

_Importer for Normals:_

	- Allows importing normals from FBX files to the custom variable used in this editor.
	- Works with multiple meshes at the same time.
	- The meshes have to already exist in the scene and be identical to the ones in the file (same number of vertices and faces).


==================================================================================

*Documentation:*

*Some of this is out of date and is being updated a little bit at a time*


_*Main Panel:*_

*Export* 					- Opens the menu for the included fbx exporter

*Import Normals*			- Imports normals from an fbx file and copies them to the editor's custom normals variables for found objects

*Initialize Data* 			- Creates new custom mesh data object for selected mesh

*Reset* 					- Reset's custom mesh data to default values
*Clear* 					- Deletes custom mesh data

Custom Normals
*Enable/Disable* 			- Show/hide the normals editor

*Match Grid* 				- Sets grid scale and subdivisions to 16 to match the grid to UDK's
							    or resets them to default, UE4 settings soon



*Exporter:*

Altered export settings:

*Up/Forward Axis* 		- Allows flipping the mesh's matrix for 

*Normals* 				- Default 		- Blender generates normals
						- From Editor 	- Custom nromals from the included Vertex Normals Editor
						- asdsn's Addon - export normals from the Recalc Vertex Normals addon

*Tangents + Binormals* 	- calculate and export tangents + 'binormals' for the mesh

*New Option, Required for skeletal meshes if you don't want weird rotations on import*

*Root Bone*				- Change this to the name of your mesh's root bone if exporting a skeletal mesh.



*Importer:*

*Selected Objects*		- Toggle importing normals for selected meshes or all meshes in the scene

===================================================================================================


*Vertex Normals Editor:*

*To enable:*

	- Go to the UDK FBX Tool panel, click Initialize
	- Click Enable under 'Vertex Normals'


*Manual editing:*

*Poly:*
	- Select a vertex or set of vertices on the same face,
	- Set the face index in the textbox below the normal coordinate,
	- Set the x,y,z, normal coordinate to whatever you want,
	- Click *Set*

*Vertex:*
	- Make sure *Edit All* is checked,
	- Same steps as per-poly, but face index is not used

*Checking 'Real-Time' will change the normal as you change the coordinates in the box*


*Automatic Generation:*

- Select a mode from the dropdown menu.

- Overview of modes:
	- *'Smooth (Default)'*
		-- Generates Blender's default normals + copies to custom data 
	- *'By Vector'*
		-- All normals point in the specified direction, defaults to Up
	- *'Bent'*
		-- Normals point away from 3d cursor location
		-- Good for tree foliage when used with 'Selected Only'
		-- Checking 'Use Backfaces' will calculate normals facing the opposite direction for faces that are not selected (for 2-sided planes)
	- *'Ground Foliage'*
		-- Good for grass planes - normals on selected vertices point up, everything else away from 'Center Offset'
			- Lowering the Center Offset's Z-value will lower the amount by which upper normals are bent, making the shading look less 'round'
		-- If 'Ignore Hidden' is set, you can hide parts of the mesh and generate only for visible faces
		-- This mode produces the best results with a two-sided mesh, but a 2-sided material will also benefit.
	- *'Custom (angle-based)'*
		-- A customizable algorithm I'm working on to generate normals based on dot product tresholds for face angles
		-- 'Smoothing Threshold' is the maximum dot product-based difference between the angles of normals on the same face. (0.99 is flat shading, -0.99 is smooth)

- Checking *Selected Only* will generate normals for selected faces (this is still buggy with the 'Smooth' and 'Custom' algorithms).



*Transfer Normals:*

NOTE: This is a work in progress feature and may mess with the vertex order. Pasting overlapping vertices' normals with this will generate errors.

*Copy* 		- copies selected vertex normals to buffer
*Paste*		- pastes buffered normals to vertices found at the same position

The points of this feature are to reduce seams on modular character meshes and to allow copying of sharp edges from identical meshes with edge splits.


*Display:*

- Options for drawing lines to represent the vertex normals (color, scale, selection only)




=========================================================================================================
Changelog: 

_(not counting the ridiculous amount of edits after each update)_


*0.10.1*

- *exporter*:
- fixed scaling for static mesh exports, not working properly for armatures at the moment
- the exporter now detects the root bone of any parented armature, removing the need to manually enter root bone name
- fixed an export error that occured when exporting a mesh twice (the normals list was getting cleared if in vertex mode)
- *editor*:
- fixed Default auto-generation method

*0.10.0*

- replaced broken init file (Blender should recognize the addon again)
- added ability to switch between per-poly and vertex normals in editor
- added ability to apply normals to mesh (vertex mode only, no split normals)
- rewrote Custom auto-generation mode (much faster now, and less likely to produce bad results)
- added bending ratio to Bent auto-generation mode
- rewrote copy/paste functionality
- various fixes to armature export

*0.9.0*

- added importer for normals only
- *exporter:*
- more exporter performance improvements
- changed the way normals etc are exported
- removed vertex sorting stuff from normals export since it should all be handled by the editor now

*0.8.0*

- *exporter:*
- rewrote the armature bone fix to parent the root bone to the scene (the way the armature object was before)
-- exported files should now be compatible with nvidia apex tools and anything else that uses fbx
-- no more messing with UDK's imported mesh rotations
- changed the way axis settings are handled during export and set up separate axis options
- exporter speed improvements

*0.7.5*

- *editor:*
- fixed Custom (Angle-Based) auto-generation mode. It's slightly slower (as in, it can take about 5 min for a 3600 poly mesh), but should no longer produce weird results on complex meshes.
- fixed wrong vertex being selected while using manual edit (bad math)
- *exporter:*
- added check for UV layer before calculating tangents. If not found, the mesh is exported without tangents (default behavior)

*0.7.0*

- initial release